---

layout: post
title: thoughts from the frontier
excerpt: almost comprehensive, but no thought for conservation
categories: [NIPS 2016]
comments: true
image: 
  feature: https://github.com/deenhe91/deenhe91.github.io/blob/master/images/treeneur.jpg?raw=true
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
---

# NIPS 2016

As the Magic conference rounds up on Sunday evening at the CCIB in Barcelona and the fur and crystal-clad magicians roll up their mats and head into the night, leagues of nerds arrive to register for the 30th annual Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) conference. As was driven home at the intro talks, the conference has close to doubled in size since last year with a total of 6000 attendees. I collect my badge, my name spelled correctly - a pleasant surprise after years of misspelled coffee cups and name tags - and I am ready. To my delight, the giant, edgy conference centre is minutes away from the sparkling mediterranean sea front, giving the eager conference goers plenty of opportunity to ponder optimisation problems with their toes in the sand.

The range in age, race and industry is quite astonishing. Even the gender divide is shrinking and with 900 of the 6000 being women it doesn't feel as much as a boy's club as it did. The old timers, men and women who have been in the field since the birth of deep learning in the 70s are here. As are some high school kids, who, enamoured with TensorFlow, wanted to come and see what it was all about. 

The mix of people is surprising. There is definitely an air of fandom in the building, especially when people like Yann LeCun stroll through, wearing the same badge we all are. It feels like a movie star is in the house, with people honing in from all corners of the room to express their admiration. In his talk, he entranced us all with his stories of the original team of Neural Network believers. His focus was on Generative Adversarial Networks, playing to the tune of the conference in general. The craze around GANs was palpable. They have shown much success in the past year and the talks and tutorials ranged from how to train a GAN, to new techniques on 3D Model generation and the use of ['what-where' GANs](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02454). The importance of being able to generate labels for data in an unsupervised or semi-supervised fashion was a popular mantra. This is important because we have the knowledge and the tools to build models and gain insights but collecting enough of the right data is often time consuming, expensive and difficult. 

## _“The challenge of the next several years is to let 
## machines learn from raw, unlabeled data, such as images, 
## videos and text.”_ -Yann LeCun

The field of Machine Learning has gained much traction and has become so broad that NIPS struggled to embody everything the field has to offer. Multiple symposium tracks, ‘areas’ and floors along with rotating poster presentations tackled this problem to some extent but it was still argued that perhaps we needed individual conferences for more specific topics. NIPS Health, NIPS Theory, NIPS NLP, NIPS Vision, so the list goes on. But one of the main strengths of this conference is its interdisciplinarity. I had lunch with neuroscientists, ecologists, mathematicians, physicists and risk management analysts. It was fascinating to sit with these people and hear how machine learning had its role in all these different disciplines. You can attend the conference and pick and choose subject matter in depth, like a specialist update, or you can go and get a broader understanding of how relevant machine learning and neural nets are to virtually every field out there. Neural nets are being used to predict product demand at Amazon, to build chatbots at Facebook and to predict drug compatibility in the search for new medical options in complex disease. They are being used to summarise text and analyse sentiment. And of course, the field of vision is booming with neural nets being used to generate images, to complete images, for object and event detection.

To my disappointment, the range of topics did not extend to conservation. This, for me, was a massive drawback and I hope that more attention will be given to the power of machine learning and technology in the eco-driven sectors. Whether it's detecting poaching, illegal overfishing, or building algorithms that classify bird calls so you can collect biodiversity data by having sensors in gardens and national parks, the potential for machine learning in conservation is significant and should be given the space. NIPS was largely focused on theory and technique, it is afterall, a showcase of the latest and greatest in information processing research so not an application-based conference in any sense. However, there were definite themes that grabbed the spotlight (healthcare, image generation, robotics), so why there was no attention given to eco-related machine learning is beyond me. 

Despite this, it is a conference worth attending for anyone with an interest in machine learning, and a testament to machine learning's success in multiple areas.  
