---

layout: post
title: but why 'learning'?
excerpt: explaining the learning in machine learning
categories: [Data Thoughts]
comments: true
image:
  feature: https://mmguitarbar.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/guitar-banner-sm.jpg
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
---

When trying to explain some machine learning concept to a friend, family member, or client, I have been confronted with the question: "But what is the _learning_ part of machine learning?". This is a fair question. A common misconception is that machine learning is the process by which a machine learns from experience - that when it gives the wrong prediction for new data, the machine must adapt to the new observations and, in time, the model becomes more complex and accurate as with the human brain. This is not what data scientists and statisticians mean when they talk about machine learning. In fact, those processes, perhaps more commonly used in the field of Artificial Intelligence, are referred to as __online machine learning__. This uses machine learning algorithms, but they are embedded in systems which are able to assess results and instigate retraining of the models. It is the kind of technology that inspires _her_ and _I, robot_ and is preeeetty cool. Okay, but the question remains, why is machine learning, machine _learning_, then?

What it boils down to, is the stage we call 'training'. During the model training period, the model (or 'machine') learns to perform a specific task. To give an example, machine learning is often used for classification tasks. A binary classifier is an algorithm used to determine whether something is one thing or not. 

Say you have data on 1000 guitars. The data tells you how much they weigh, when they were made, something about how they sound - perhaps how loud they are. What you really want, is a model that will tell you whether a guitar is electric or acoustic. Luckily, the data you have is labelled, which means that it tells you which guitars are acoustic and which are electric. Using this data, you can do 'supervised machine learning' and build a model that _learns_ to determine whether a guitar is electric or acoustic based on the data you give it. Different machine learning algorithms will achieve this by [different means](http://deenhe91.github.io/articles/2016-05/classifiers), but that process of training a model so that, ultimately you can say to it _"okay, I have a guitar that weighs 2kg, plays at 60dB and was built in 1970"_, it can tell you, _"I'm 87% percent certain that that's an acoustic guitar."_ is the machine's __learning__.

Once the training period is over, no further automatic machine learning happens unless you build the model into a system that analyses it's own accuracy and retrains. But that initial training stage is essential and can be incredibly valuable in easing or reducing tedious tasks, as well as supplementing difficult ones like medical diagnoses.


